I spent Wednesday, 2 August 2017 (5:30 AM to 5:00 PM)
birding a few select locations within the Imperial Valley
and along the south shore of the Salton Sea. I started the
day in the area at the intersection of Carter and Fites
Roads southwest of Brawley, then moved north into Brawley
where Curtis A. Marantz joined me and drove northward to
Ramer Lake (access limited due to muddy roads). We then
continued northward to the IID Wetlands, and into Niland.
In Niland we birded northward along International Avenue,
west along 4 th Street, then south along Luna Avenue. We then
drove northwestward by way of Alcott, English and Highway
111 to the Wister Unit HQ. From here we drove southward by
way of Davis and Schrimpf Roads to Morton Bay and the north
end of Garst Road, stopping briefly at the intersection of
Pound and Davis Roads. From here we drove south on Garst
and west on Sinclair Roads to the Salton Sea National
Wildlife Refuge HQ. After spending a little time at Rock
Hill, we checked for water birds along the shoreline of the
Salton Sea between the west end of Sinclair Road and
Obsidian Butte, and from Obsidian Butte to the west end of
Young Road. We then drove southwestward to Unit 1 of the
Salton Sea National Wildlife Refuge and the north end of
Poe Road. From there we drove southeastward through
Westmorland into Brawley where we looked briefly at
Riverside Cemetery. Curtis A. Marantz then left to drive
north and I drove south on Dogwood Road to the southeast
corner of El Centro where I spent a little time. I then
drove westward to Lakeview Golfcourse and looked over Fig
Lagoon before continuing west to San Diego.
There was close to complete cloud cover through the
day with rain threatening at times along with much higher
humidity than normal, and with little to no wind, along
with temperatures ranging from 85 to 105 degrees.
The only Gull-billed Terns remaining at Rock Hill were
those few pairs with flightless and begging young, but
small numbers were gathered on the nearby shore. Black
Skimmer numbers also appeared unchanged, and included at
least ten flightless young. Shorebird habitat at Unit 1 of
the Salton Sea National Wildlife Refuge had mostly dried-
up.
Species seen and/or heard – Gadwall (1), Mallard
(125), Cinnamon Teal (20), Northern Shoveler (20 –
including birds at Rock Hill, Unit 1 of the Salton Sea
National Wildlife Refuge and Fig Lagoon that were clearly
recently arrived fall migrants/winter visitors), Northern
Pintail (2 – two males at Unit 1 of the Salton Sea National
Wildlife Refuge are believed to have summered locally),Redhead (6 – six at Rock Hill summering locally), Ruddy
Duck (500), Gambel’s Quail (5), Pied-billed Grebe (10),
Eared Grebe (150), Western Grebe (50), Clark’s Grebe (6 –
including one on a nest at Ramer Lake), Aechmophorus sp.
(10), Rock Pigeon (100), Eurasian Collared-Dove (250), Inca
Dove (20), Common Ground-Dove (30), White-winged Dove
(150), Mourning Dove (75), Greater Roadrunner (4), Lesser
Nighthawk (5), Black-chinned Hummingbird (10), Anna’s
Hummingbird (10), Costa’s Hummingbird (3), Rufous
Hummingbird (1 – one female near the southeastern corner of
El Centro), Ridgway’s Rail (2), Sora (2 – two at the west
end of Sinclair Road were the first the first that I have
encountered this fall), Common Gallinule (10), American
Coot (50), Black-necked Stilt (100), American Avocet (600),
Black-bellied Plover (50), Snowy Plover (35), Semipalmated
Plover (20), Killdeer (35), Whimbrel (15), Long-billed
Curlew (25), Marbled Godwit (75), Stilt Sandpiper (1 – one
adult in alternate-plumage at the west end of Sinclair
Road), Least Sandpiper (75), Western Sandpiper (3500 –
including the first juveniles that I have encountered this
fall), Long-billed Dowitcher (150), Spotted Sandpiper (5),
Greater Yellowlegs (15), Willet (75), Lesser Yellowlegs (3
– including one juvenile at the west end of Sinclair Road
which was the first that I have encountered this fall),
Wilson’s Phalarope (6), Red-necked Phalarope (2 – two at
Fig Lagoon were the only shorebirds at that location),
Laughing Gull (4), Heermann’s Gull (1 – one adult
transitioning into basic-plumage with other gulls at the
west end of Sinclair Road was the same bird seen here on 28
July), Ring-billed Gull (350 – including the first juvenile
that I have encountered locally this fall), Yellow-footed
Gull (40 – all adults), California Gull (750), Lesser
Black-backed Gull (1 – one first-summer bird with other
gulls at the west end of Sinclair Road was unexpected but
not the first on the Salton Sea at this time of the year
since a first-summer bird was present along the south shore
of the Salton Sea 13 July-21 September 2012 - NAB 66:734),
Least Tern (1 – one hatch-year bird with mostly black
primaries actively diving for prey at Unit 1 of the Salton
Sea National Wildlife Refuge was the same bird seen here on
28 July), Gull-billed Tern (40 – including four hatch-year
birds begging for food at the west end of Sinclair Road),
Caspian Tern (175), Black Tern (1000 – including the first
juveniles that I have encountered this fall), Forster’s
Tern (35), Black Skimmer (350 – all but two at Rock Hill),
Neotropic Cormorant (5 – all at Ramer Lake), Double-crested
Cormorant (750), American White Pelican (150), BrownPelican (500), Least Bittern (10), Great Blue Heron (30),
Great Egret (75), Snowy Egret (150), Cattle Egret (2500),
Green Heron (5), Black-crowned Night-Heron (5), White-faced
Ibis (2500), Turkey Vulture (15), Osprey (1), Cooper’s Hawk
(3 – an adult male and a female at Riverview Cemetery in
Brawley and an immature female near the southeastern corner
of El Centro), Barn Owl (1), Great Horned Owl (5 – four at
the Wister Unit HQ where a pair successfully fledged two
young earlier this year and one near the southeastern
corner of El Centro), Burrowing Owl (15), Gila Woodpecker
(3), Ladder-backed Woodpecker (2), American Kestrel (15),
Black Phoebe (15), Vermilion Flycatcher (1 – a female at
Riverview Cemetery in Brawley), Ash-throated Flycatcher
(3), Western Kingbird (35), Loggerhead Shrike (5), Common
Raven (2), Tree Swallow (10), Northern Rough-winged Swallow
(5), Cliff Swallow (750), Barn Swallow (5 – five at the
intersection of Carter and Fites Roads southwest of Brawley
were likely adults with fledged young), Verdin (15), Marsh
Wren (5), Black-tailed Gnatcatcher (5), Northern
Mockingbird (20), European Starling (500), House Sparrow
(50), House Finch (40), Orange-crowned Warbler (2 – two
near the southeastern corner of El Centro were the first
that I have encountered locally this fall), Yellow Warbler
(4), Common Yellowthroat (5), Yellow-breasted Chat (1 – one
near the intersection of Carter and Fites Roads southwest
of Brawley), Abert’s Towhee (15), Lark Sparrow (1 – one at
the northeast corner of the IID Wetlands near Niland), Song
Sparrow (10), Black-headed Grosbeak (1), Blue Grosbeak (1),
Lazuli Bunting (3 – three together at the northeast corner
of the IID Wetlands near Niland were the first that I have
encountered locally this fall), Red-winged Blackbird
(1500), Western Meadowlark (10), Yellow-headed Blackbird
(2), Brewer’s Blackbird (15), Great-tailed Grackle (150),
Bronzed Cowbird (1 – one hatch-year bird near the southern
end of International Avenue in Niland), Brown-headed
Cowbird (50), Hooded Oriole (1 – one adult male near the
southern end of International Avenue in Niland) and
Bullock’s Oriole (15) - 115 species.
The single (1) first-summer Lesser Black-backed Gull,
initially spotted by CAM, was with a small flock of mostly
California Gulls on the shore of the Salton Sea at the west
end of Sinclair Road. This gull appeared close to the same
size, but slightly larger than the accompanying California
Gulls. The head, neck and breast were mostly white, but
with some gray-brown around the eyes, and gray-brown
streaking on the hind-neck and sides of the breast. The
rest of the under-parts were white with much more gray-brown markings. The upper-parts were a dark brownish-gray,
but with the individual feathers broadly edged with white
giving the mantle a somewhat checkered appearance. The long
primaries were unmarked black with the tips extending well
beyond the tip of the tail. The somewhat slender bill was
entirely black, and the legs and feet were pale pinkish. We
never saw this gull open its wings, or fly, so were unable
to determine the flight-pattern or the coloration of the
rump and tail. However, to both of us, the bird was clearly
a first-summer (hatched last year) Lesser Black-backed
Gull.
